william henry gates iii born october ,  is an american businessman, investor, philanthropist, and writer best known for cofounding the software giant microsoft, along with his childhood friend paul allen. during his career at microsoft, gates held the positions of chairman, chief executive officer ceo, president, and chief software architect, while also being its largest individual shareholder until may . he was a pioneer of the microcomputer revolution of the s and s. gates was born and raised in seattle, washington. in , he and allen founded microsoft in albuquerque, new mexico. gates led the company as its chairman and chief executive officer until stepping down as ceo in january , succeeded by steve ballmer, but he remained chairman of the board of directors and became chief software architect. during the late s, he was criticized for his business tactics, which were considered anticompetitive. this opinion has been upheld by numerous court rulings. in june , gates transitioned into a parttime role at microsoft and fulltime work at the bill  melinda gates foundation, the private charitable foundation he and his thenwife melinda had established in . he stepped down as chairman of the microsoft board in february  and assumed the role of technology adviser to support newly appointed ceo satya nadella. in march , gates left his board positions at microsoft and berkshire hathaway to focus on his philanthropic efforts on climate change, global health and development, and education. since , gates has been included in the forbes list of the worlds billionaires. from  to , he held the forbes title of the richest person in the world every year except in  and from  to . in october , he was surpassed by amazon founder jeff bezos, who had an estimated net worth of us$. billion compared to gatess net worth of us. billion at the time. as of april , gates has an estimated net worth of us$ billion, making him the fifthrichest person in the world according to the bloomberg billionaires index. later in his career and since leaving daytoday operations at microsoft in , gates has pursued other business and philanthropic endeavors. he is the founder and chairman of several companies, including ben, cascade investment, terrapower, bgc, and breakthrough energy. he has donated sizable amounts of money to various charitable organizations and scientific research programs through the bill  melinda gates foundation, reported to be the worlds largest private charity. through the foundation, he led an early st century vaccination campaign that significantly contributed to the eradication of the wild poliovirus in africa. in , gates and warren buffett founded the giving pledge, whereby they and other billionaires pledge to give at least half of their wealth to philanthropy.  william henry gates iii was born on october , , in seattle, washington as the only son of william h. gates sr.  and his first wife, mary maxwell gates . his ancestry includes english, german, and irishscotsirish. his father was a prominent lawyer, and his mother served on the board of directors of first interstate bancsystem and united way of america. gatess maternal grandfather was j. w. maxwell, a national bank president. he also has an older sister kristi kristianne and a younger sister libby. he is the fourth of his name in his family but is known as william gates iii or trey i.e., three because his father had the ii suffix. the family lived in the sand point area of seattle in a home that was damaged by a rare tornado when gates was seven years old. according to gates, when he was young, his parents wanted him to pursue a career in law. during his childhood, his family regularly attended a church of the congregational christian churches, a protestant reformed denomination. gates was small for his age and was bullied as a child. the family encouraged competition; one visitor reported that it didnt matter whether it was hearts or pickleball or swimming to the dock; there was always a reward for winning and there was always a penalty for losing. at age , he enrolled in the private lakeside prep school, where he wrote his first software program. when he was in eighth grade, the mothers club at the school used proceeds from lakeside schools rummage sale to buy a teletype model  asr terminal and a block of computer time on a general electric ge computer for the students. gates took an interest in programming the ge system in basic, and he was excused from math classes to pursue his interest. he wrote his first computer program on this machine, an implementation of tictactoe that allowed users to play games against the computer. gates was fascinated by the machine and how it would always execute software code perfectly. after the mothers club donation was exhausted, gates and other students sought time on systems including dec pdp minicomputers. one of these systems was a pdp belonging to computer center corporation ccc which banned gates, paul allen, ric weiland, and gatess best friend and first business partner kent evans for the summer after it caught them exploiting bugs in the operating system to obtain free computer time. the four students formed the lakeside programmers club to make money. at the end of the ban, they offered to find bugs in cccs software in exchange for extra computer time. rather than using the system remotely via teletype, gates went to cccs offices and studied source code for various programs that ran on the system, including fortran, lisp, and machine language. the arrangement with ccc continued until  when the company went out of business. the following year, a lakeside teacher enlisted gates and evans to automate the schools classscheduling system, providing them computer time and royalties in return. the duo worked diligently in order to have the program ready for their senior year. towards the end of their junior year, evans was killed in a mountain climbing accident, which gates has described as one of the saddest days of his life. gates then turned to allen who helped him finish the system for lakeside. at , gates formed a venture with allen called trafodata to make traffic counters based on the intel  processor. in , he served as a congressional page in the house of representatives. he was a national merit scholar when he graduated from lakeside school in . he scored  out of  on the scholastic aptitude tests sat and enrolled at harvard college in the autumn of . he didnt stay at harvard long enough to choose a concentration, but took mathematics including math  and graduate level computer science courses. while at harvard, he met fellow student and future microsoft ceo steve ballmer. gates left harvard after two years while ballmer stayed and graduated magna cum laude. years later, ballmer succeeded gates as microsofts ceo and maintained that position from  until his resignation in . gates devised an algorithm for pancake sorting as a solution to one of a series of unsolved problems presented in a combinatorics class by professor harry lewis. his solution held the record as the fastest version for over  years, and its successor is faster by only . his solution was formalized and published in collaboration with harvard computer scientist christos papadimitriou. gates remained in contact with paul allen and joined him at honeywell during the summer of . in , the mits altair  was released based on the intel  cpu, and gates and allen saw the opportunity to start their own computer software company. gates dropped out of harvard that same year. his parents were supportive of him after seeing how much he wanted to start his own company. he explained his decision to leave harvard: if things hadnt worked out, i could always go back to school. i was officially on leave.donkey.bas, is a computer game written in and included with early versions of the pc dos operating system distributed with the original ibm pc. it is a driving game in which the player must avoid hitting donkeys. the game was written by gates and neil konzen.